Good day I'm Norman Wildberger today wouldn't
look at unique factorization one of the most
fundamental theorems in number theory and we're
going to be looking towards understanding this
unique factorization for bigger and bigger numbers
and we're going to see that when we do that the
familiar certainty that we usually associate with
this result starts to break down we're gonna see
that there's actually serious difficulties with
this theorem once we start turning our gaze to
bigger numbers so let's first of all get familiar
with the standard formulation of this result so
it's a very famous theorem it goes back to Euclid
a long time ago and the statement is that every
natural number n can be written as a product of
prime numbers in essentially a unique way which
means up to reordering of the factors so for
example here is a couple of numbers here's a
t-1000 to 590 and it's factorization into primes
is 2 times 5 times 41 times 199 and if we look at
the next number which is 80 1591 we get 3 times
to 27,000 197 that happens to be a prime number
the next one 80 1592 is 2 cubed 2 times 7 times
31 times 47 and we see for the first time a prime
appearing more than once which typically can
happen the next number is product of two primes
139 times 587 and then the next one is 2 times 3
cubed times 1511 okay it's clear that this prime
factorization if there is some kind of pattern
to it it's not very obvious what it is although
I guess we can see that there's some relationships
if this number here has 2 as a factor that if we
go to up then we'll also get 2 as a factor and
so on but predicting what the sort of bigger
primes that appear here's is quite tricky but
nevertheless anyone number can according to this
theorem be factored uniquely into a product
of primes and this comes from Euclid's books
basically 7 and 9 so it's a very beautiful result
and of course sort of a pillar of number theory
well there are two really important ingredients
in this theorem the idea of a natural number and
the idea of a prime number well let's suppose that
we kind of understand what natural numbers are for
those of you been watching the series steadily
you're maybe not as confident about that claim
as you might have been formally we've sort of
touched base with the idea that natural numbers
are actually quite complicated to define correctly
let's let's suppose for the sake of argument that
we're comfortable with the idea of a natural
number and let's remind ourselves about what
a prime number means well a natural number N
and for technical reasons we look at numbers
and bigger than 1 is prime if it is not divisible
by any natural number M less than it which is also
bigger than 1 so a number is prime if it doesn't
have any factors less than itself except for the
trivial factor what every number is divisible by 1
so verifying that a number n is prime is actually
a lot of work because according to definition
you have to check that it's not divisible by
every single number less than it except the law
that's especially a lot of work if n happens to
be large ok but for smaller values it's not
hard to find out what the primes are and they
were very familiar 2 3 5 7 11 13 17 19 23 29 31
37 41 well let's carry on a little bit further 43
then 47:53 59 61 67 71 73 79 eighty three eighty
nine ninety seven those are all the primes less
than 100 then 101 is prime so is 103 107 109 113
hundred twenty-seven hundred thirty one hundred
thirty seven hundred thirty-nine 149 jump up ten
151 157 163 167 173 179 181 191 another jump of
10 193 just a pair of they're separating those 197
199 another twin prime pair then 211 a bigger jump
to 23 to 39 to 41 we've seen yo some a little bit
bigger jumps to 51 to 57 to 63 to 69 to 71 to 77
to 81 then to 83 to 93 307 311 313 317 331 337 347
349 353 359 367 373 379 383 389 397 those are the
primes less than 400 okay they of course carry on
and eventually we get to say a hundred thousand
in that area there and then sort of starting at
a hundred thousand the primes are a hundred and
thousand and three hundred thousand and nineteen
hundred thousand and forty three one hundred
thousand and forty nine hundred thousand and fifty
seven two thousand and sixty nine five thousand
and one hundred three hundred thousand one hundred
nine hundred thousand one hundred and twenty nine
hundred thousand one hundred fifty one hundred
thousand and one fifty three and eventually live
at further on we get up to say 10 million and at
the 10 million mark that X prime is ten million in
nineteen and then ten million seventy-nine ten
million 103 10 million and 121 10 million and
139 horse keeps going and it turns out that the
millionth prime is this number here the millionth
prime is 15 million four hundred and eighty five
thousand eight hundred and sixty-three so this
pattern of primes has fascinated mankind for a
long time okay and it's interesting because it's
kind of regular in a kind of way you know what
they move up never by wildly big jumps but sort
of smaller jumps and then bigger jumps and in this
sort of random certainly seems kind of random but
as the numbers get bigger well then the jumps do
start getting bigger there's more space separating
adjacent primes but still there's some kind of
pattern even though this seemingly a lot of noise
in this pattern okay so it's a very interesting
combination of regularity and irregularity very
fascinating a combination of those two things at
the same time what makes it perhaps so interesting
and of course the fact that these are the building
blocks in this multiplicative sense because of the
unique factorization theorem these irregular
things are the kind of atoms which are the
constituents of all the numbers now particularly
interested in the logical structure here because
that's the problematic issue here so we really
want to understand why is the theorem true and
what possible difficulties might there be with
this theorem okay so the theorem has two parts
there's a statement about existence of a prime
factorization for a natural number and there's
a statement of uniqueness up to order of such a
factorization so let's start with the existence
given a natural number n well we want to explain
why we can factor it into primes if n is prime
itself then we are done and is a factorization
and we can stop otherwise it means that n is
divisible by some number less than it so it
has a factorization of P times Q where P and
Q are numbers less than and I mean Eddie factors
of n have to be less than or equal to n and if
P is bigger than 1 then Q has to be less than n
so these two factors have to be between 1 and n
strictly between 1 and n okay now if P and Q are
Prime's then this is a factorization and we're
finished otherwise we continue we take one of them
if it's a prime no problem then we go to the next
one so if they're both Prime's then we're done
but if one of them is not a prime then that one
can be further factored and we just keep on doing
that the process must end at which point we have
a prime factorization so it must end because the
numbers involved are getting smaller and smaller
they're natural numbers and each factor is smaller
than the number that we're starting with but still
bigger than one and that's a finite process which
eventually must stop this is often stated in terms
of induction so it's a little bit subtle but
I think we we could all sort of see what the
argument is the uniqueness part of the theorem is
a little bit more subtle even to state and also
to prove so if N has two prime factorizations
let's say n is equal to p1 times p2 times all
the way up to P K so we have K Prime's and it is
also equal to the product q1 times q2 all the way
up to QL where we have another say ll products
so these are both prime factorizations of n then
what do we mean by the uniqueness of the prime
factorization well we can say it very efficiently
in terms of multi sets we can say that the multi
set consisting of the primes P 1 P 2 all the way
up to P K equals the multi set Q 1 Q 2 all the way
up to QL so this is a multi set that contains each
one or the factor is here exactly one so the P
one is there the P 2 is there all the way to the P
K's there there could be repetitions here because
there can be repetitions in the prime factors here
but the ordering here doesn't matter the order
here doesn't matter so the multi set framework
is exactly what we need to capture the aspect
of having multiplicities as well as not being
ordered so it's a lot more awkward to say this
without m sets okay now to prove that this is
true involves showing that say p1 prime that start
off there actually equals one of the qi that's the
standard way of showing that these two things are
these two multi sets are the same we choose one of
these Prime's let's say p1 and then we're going
to convince ourselves that this prime that we've
taken from the first factorization actually agrees
with one of the primes in the second factorization
it's a basic argument once we've done that so
let's say we decide that p1 happens to be equal
to say q7 okay then we can remove the p1 and the
q7 from both sides and then we have two smaller
factorizations and then we repeat the process
basic idea I want us to go through it have a
general idea of the direction of this proof so in
order to prove that equality of M sets we need to
show that if p1 divides this big product of primes
Q 1 Q 2 all the way to Q and that it actually
equals those products and the key ingredient
for that is this innocent-looking lemma called
Euclid's lemma which is that if P is a prime and P
divides a product of two natural numbers n times M
then either P divides N or P divides app so for
example 17 is a prime 17 happens to divide 335
thousand 257 and you can check that this number
actually is the product of 481 times 697 okay so
Euclid's lemma apply to this situation would allow
us to deduce that since 17 divides this product
that therefore it must be true that 17 either
divides for 81 or it divides 697 one of those
has to be true if it's true that 17 divides the
original product and I'll let you decide which one
of these is the case it's interesting and useful
to contrast that with the example where we're
dividing by something that's not a prime so here's
a situation where 18 happens to divide 136,000 and
422 and this number is the product of 159 times
858 okay but we are not allowed to deduce that 18
either divides this or this so it turns out that
18 does not divide 159 and 18 does not divide 858
so here is the lemma being applied correctly to
a prime and here is a example of the dilemma not
working because the number that we're dividing by
is not a prime Euclid's lemma is relatively simple
but it's a little bit subtle and it's sort of the
basis upon which this argument that if p1 divides
a product then P what actually equals one of the
primes that rests on so the heart of the matter
is convincing oneself that you klitz lemma is true
all right so we're investigating a little bit of
elementary number theory here pretty well found
in any kind of number theory texts but we want
to move a little bit in this direction so we're
gonna be talking about number theory a little bit
but with the aim of looking at number theory for
bigger and bigger numbers which is a little bit
interesting and maybe a little bit unusual okay
so how do we prove Euclid's lemma suppose that P
does divide the product n times M and P is a prime
alright so if P divides the first number n then we
are done what we're trying to do is deduce that P
that divides N or it divides am so if P divides n
well we can finish so otherwise we can say well
then if P does not divide n then well we want to
make a deduction and eventually deduce that P
divides M that will then prove what we want to
do all right so if P does not divide n what does
it mean it means then that P and n are relatively
prime that's often indicated by this symbol here
and I remind you that relatively prime means that
they have no common factors P is a prime and P
does not divide n then we can conclude that P
and n have no common factors why is that well it's
because P is a prime and it only has two factors
mainly one and itself it's not divisible by any
other number in between 1 and itself so it only
has two factors 1 and P so if P and n have any
common factors they're either going to be 1 or
P but we've decided that P does not divide n so P
cannot be a common factor between P and n so the
other possibility is that one is the common factor
all right so if P does not divide n we do said P
and n are relatively prime or they only have a
common factor of water and now this implies an
interesting relationship between P and n this
relationship is called bazoo side entity and
it states that we can find numbers R and s such
that R times P plus s times n equals 1 and what
are these ours and SS well there's some integers R
and s so we're stepping outside the bounds of what
we've been talking about up till now we've been
just been talking about natural number arithmetic
now we're invoking some integers R and s are
possibly integers so the Xu's identity claims that
if p and n are relatively prime then we can find
integers r and s such that R times P plus s times
n equals 1 now if you'll accept this for a moment
then we can complete the proof of Euclid's lemma
and it goes as far as we take this result here and
we multiply both sides by the other number M so we
get RP m plus s and M equals M on the right hand
side and now we look at this and we say ok P our
original prime divides our p.m. because obviously
there's P there sitting as a factor and P also
divides this product s times an M because we're
assuming that P divides an M so P divides this
product here so it certainly divides the product
of s with an M so we're in the situation where
P divides this and P divides this and therefore P
must divide the sum of those two things which is M
so we've deduced that P divides M so the structure
of the argument is we assume that P divides the
product M if P is by the end we're fine otherwise
we invoke the Xu's identity getting these RS and
asses that satisfy this particular relation do
the trick of multiplying by M and deducing that
therefore P must divide m and that's Euclid's
lemma and so now if we have Euclid's lemma
well then this unique factorization kind of works
because then P 1 well it divides the big product
of Q's so then you split that big product into Q 1
times all the other ones and then we know that P 1
either divides Q 1 or it divides the big product
of the other ones if it divides Q 1 then it must
actually be equal to Q 1 because two Prime's
can't one can't divide each other unless they're
actually equal and if it doesn't divide Q 1 well
then it has to divide the other product and then
we apply the same procedure until we eventually
we get P 1 dividing one of the Q's and then that
must be equal to that Q ok so there's an argument
but it's basically an extension of Euclid's lemma
you can see that the story is somewhat subtle and
that Euclid must have been rather a genius to put
it together and it's very much the case right
this is 300 BC where this was really very well
understood okay so maybe Euclid's argument is
a little bit different from this but we still
have to talk about why this particular identity
is true that we've involved here and that's also
independent interest so there's a little bit more
to the story examining where does this thing come
from all right so bazoo side entity is named after
Etienne bazoo who lived from 1730 to 1783 and it
is stated again perhaps in different language if
we have two numbers a and B and they're relatively
prime they're natural numbers then RA plus s B
equals 1/4 some integers R and s we can find some
linear combination of a and B that will eat one
so for example 9 and 17 are relatively prime they
have no common factors so let's find an R and s so
that when we multiply 9 by R and 17 by s the total
is 1 and we're to do it in this sort of systematic
way that also goes back to Euclid we're basically
going to divide this is the division algorithm
of Euclid so let's take the bigger number which
is 17 and divided by the smaller number which is
9 so if we divide 17 by 9 we get a quotient of 1
and a remainder of 8 17 divided by 9 and now let's
take the 9 and divide it by the remainder 8 9 is
equal to 1 times 8 plus now a new remainder of 1
and now let's play the same thing we'll take this
last thing we divided by 8 and we'll divide it by
the new remainder 8 is equal to 8 times 1 with a
remainder of 0 this thing here then is the last
nonzero remainder before we got a perfect division
and it's at this point here that we can reverse
the steps to find the R and the S so we're gonna
take this formula and then we're going to massage
it using also this formula to get R and s so
here's how that works so here's this formula here
and we're gonna rewrite it down here as 9 minus 1
times 8 equals 1 I'll keep the 1 times just sort
of for reference to keep things organized here's
a formula that expresses 1 is a combination of
9 and 8 we're going to replace that formula by
getting rid of the 8 from the previous line so
from this line here we can write this 8 as 17
minus 1 times 9 so I'm going replace this 8 here
with 17 minus 1 times 9 from here now I have a
formula 9 minus 1 times 17 minus 1 times 9 equals
1 that only involves multiples of 9 and 17 now if
we look how many 9s do I have well I have 9 there
once and now we have minus 1 and the minus 1 all
together plus 1 there so altogether we have two
nines minus one times 17 so we reduced that two
times nine minus one times 17 equals one which we
probably could have figured out relatively easily
anyway but this sort of just illustrates the
general technique in a somewhat simple example
so in this case the R would be the two and the S
would actually be minus 1 so 2 times 9 plus minus
1 times 17 if you like that combination close one
let's have a look at a slightly more sophisticated
example let's look at the two numbers 26 and
19 these are also relatively prime they have
no common factor so according to bazoo we can find
R and s which are integers sets at R times 26 plus
s times 19 combined to give us 1 now this has an
amusing geometrical interpretation that I want
to share with you ok which so shows that this
problem is of independent interest other than
just factoring numbers it has actual applications
that are a little bit interesting so imagine here
we have a line with little steps ok this one
step separating each of these little notches
and suppose that we want to go from here circled
in red to the adjacent not one over so there's a
start and there's a finish that would be pretty
simple in ordinary terms because we would just
take one step to the right but suppose that for
some reason or another we are not allowed to take
just one step and we're constrained to take only
big steps in fact we're allowed to take either a
step of 19 so we can take a step of 19 in either
direction or we can take a step of 26 in either
direction so we can always take a step of either
19 in either direction you'll always take a step
of 26 in either direction if we could only take
steps of 19 well clearly we could only get to
multiples of 19 positive or negative but since
we're allowed both multiples of 19 and multiples
of 26 it seems at least plausible that we might
be able to get from here to here and that's what
this is actually asserting its asserting that
we can find a certain number of 26 steps which
when followed by another number of 19 steps will
total just a step with just one okay so how do we
do this how do we find these ours and S's well we
start by dividing so 26 divided by 19 will divide
the bigger one by the smaller one so 26 is 1 times
19 plus a remainder of 7 and then we're going to
divide 19 by 7 19 is 2 times 7 plus a remainder of
5 we've just divided by 7 now we divide 7 by the
remainder so 7 is 1 times 5 plus 2 the next step
we take what we divided by 5 and divide it by the
remainder 5 is 2 times 2 plus a remainder of 1 we
divided by 2 so we'll take that and divide by the
remainder 2 is 2 times 1 plus 0 the last nonzero
remainder is 1 that's the fact the greatest common
divisor of these two numbers this is a actual
algorithm that you could just choose to general
numbers will generate the greatest common divisor
of them but we're going to take that last equation
and I'm going to work our way back up so we're
going to start with this equation involving 1 as
a combination of five and twos and we're gonna
kind of work our way up until we have express
is a combination of 26 s and 19 s so let's see how
that goes so we've just copied that there and then
we're going to take this too that appears here
and use the previous equation to replace it with
seven minus one times five so this 2 is replaced
with seven minus one times five now if you look
at this and you don't actually multiply it out
you just think in terms of multiples of fives
and sevens then altogether we have a five here
and plus two fives there for a total of three
times five minus two times seven equals one now we
can check that that's true 15 minus 14 is what so
we've expressed one is a combination of five and
seven now we want to move up to a combination of
sevens and 19's so what we're going to do is we're
going to replace this five which is the previous
one with what we get from this equation from this
equation we see that five is equal to 19 minus two
times seven so this five here gets replaced with
19 minus two times seven we still have the minus
two times 7 over here equals one of course and
then when we stare at this we see that we have
combinations of 19's and 7s floating around
here we have 3 times 19 and how many 7s do we
have we have minus 6 7s there - another two 7s for
total - 8 7 so 3 times 19 - 8 times 7 is 1 that's
57 minus 56 yes that equals why we're still doing
something correctly now at the final stage we're
going to remove this 7 replace it with 26 minus 1
times 19 so that 7 gets replaced with 26 minus 1
times 19 and now hopefully there will only be 19
and 26 is in this equation so we see that there's
3 times 19 there and how many 19 here there's
minus 8 times minus 1 so it's plus 8 19's for a
total of 11 times 19 so maybe right here 11 times
19 and we also have minus 8 times 26 that's all
minus 8 times 26 and that equals 1 so there we
have expressed 1 as a combination of 19 and 26
so I guess in this language here we could you know
say R is equal to minus 8 and I guess s equals the
11 if I've done the arithmetic right so if you
want to get from here to there one step to the
right then you should take 8 steps of 26 to the
left go left with a big 26 steps and then add
11 19 steps and then come back with 11 steps of
19 and then you will end up right there you see
this kind of would have industrial applications
if you have some kind of robot arm that can go 26
or another robot arm that goes 19 and you have to
maneuver these robot arms to move something from
here to here well you have to figure out something
like this okay so so this illustrates how the Xu's
identity is justified and the Xu's identity is
then the ingredient that makes Euclid's lemma
work and Euclid's lemma is then the ingredient
that essentially makes the unique factorization
work and that's a rough outline of the story the
usual story for the theorem of Euclid the unique
factorization everything certainly seems to
be hunky-dory but I'm suggesting that maybe
everything is not hunky-dory that contained in
this story there's some potential difficulty
and that's exactly what happened so there is some
potential difficulty but that potential difficulty
only becomes really visible when we move beyond
our comfortable zone of small familiar numbers
and we head out to bigger numbers like Zed okay
so I claim that Zed does not have a unique prime
factorization that by the time we get to Zed this
argument somehow has broken down and so we want
to examine that claim one have a look at it is
that possible how could that be what part of the
argument might not work for such a big number or a
relatively big number as said we would investigate
that next time I hope you'll join me for that
i'm Norman Wildberger thanks for listening